What is Project Loom ?

Project Loom is an OpenJDK project that introduced virtual threads (finalized in Java 21)
and continues to be enhanced in Java 25.


🔷 Simple way to remember
Project Loom = umbrella project
Virtual Threads = main feature
Java 25 = improved version, not the origin

🔷 Quick analogy
Think of it like:
Project Loom = Electric car technology
Virtual Threads = Battery system
Java 21 = First working car
Java 25 = Better, faster upgraded model

🔷 So what is Project Loom actually?

👉 It is a concept / initiative that introduces:

✅ Virtual Threads
✅ Structured Concurrency
✅ Scoped Values

to improve how Java handles concurrency.

🔷 What is Project Loom (Java 25 view)?

👉 Project Loom is a Java initiative that introduces a new lightweight threading model to simplify
concurrency and massively improve scalability.

At its core, it brings:

1. Virtual Threads (Main Feature)

(i)   Lightweight threads managed by the JVM (not OS)
(ii)  You can create thousands to millions of threads
(iii) Designed for I/O-bound tasks (APIs, DB calls, networking)

👉 Think:

Old Java → Few heavy threads
Loom → Millions of lightweight threads

🔷 What are Virtual Threads?

A virtual thread is:

-Still a java.lang.Thread
-But not tied 1:1 to OS threads
-Runs on top of carrier threads (OS threads) using M:N scheduling


⚙️ How it works:
When a thread is waiting (e.g., DB call):

-JVM pauses (unmounts) it
-Frees the OS thread
-Runs another virtual thread
-When ready → resumes again

👉 This avoids wasting OS threads during blocking operations.

🔷 Why Project Loom is important

🚀 1. Massive scalability
(i)  Traditional threads → limited (~thousands)
(ii) Virtual threads → millions possible

🧠 2. Simpler coding model

Before Loom:

You had to use async code (CompletableFuture, reactive programming)

With Loom:

Write normal blocking code
Still get high scalability

👉 Cleaner, easier, less bugs

💾 3. Low memory usage

(i)  Platform thread → ~1 MB stack
(ii) Virtual thread → few KB, grows dynamically

🔄 4. No need for thread pools

-Earlier → thread pools required
-Now → 1 thread per task is fine

🔷 What’s new/improved in Java 25 (Loom context)

By Java 25:

✅ Virtual Threads → Fully stable & optimized

First finalized in Java 21

Java 25 improves:

(i)   Performance
(ii)  Better handling of synchronized
(iii) Better observability & tooling

✅ Structured Concurrency (Preview)

Helps manage multiple threads like a single unit

Example: cancel all subtasks if one fails

✅ Scoped Values (Final)

Safer alternative to ThreadLocal

Works better with virtual threads

🔷 Virtual Threads vs Platform Threads

Feature	                         Platform Threads	                             Virtual Threads

Managed by	                     OS	                                             JVM
Cost	                         Heavy	                                         Lightweight
Count	                         Thousands	                                     Millions
Best for	                     CPU-bound tasks	                             I/O-bound tasks
Blocking	                     Expensive	                                     Cheap


🔷 When to use Loom (important for interviews)

✅ Use Virtual Threads for:

a.Web servers (Spring Boot APIs)
b.Database calls
c.Microservices
d.File/network I/O

❌ Avoid for:
(i)Heavy CPU tasks (ML, encoding, computation)
(ii)Long-running synchronized blocks

🔷 Simple Example

Thread.startVirtualThread(() -> {
    System.out.println("Running in virtual thread");
});

Or executor:

try (var executor = Executors.newVirtualThreadPerTaskExecutor()) {
    executor.submit(() -> doWork());
}


🔷 One-line Interview Answer

👉
Project Loom in Java 25 introduces virtual threads—lightweight, JVM-managed threads that allow writing
simple blocking code while achieving massive scalability for concurrent applications.
