What Are Sealed Classes and Interfaces?

Sealed classes and interfaces let you control which other classes or interfaces can
extend or implement them.

This means you can say, “Only these specific classes are allowed to be subtypes of this
class/interface.”

Why Use Them?
Sometimes, you want to limit how your code can be extended. For example, if you make a
Shape class, you might only want Circle, Square, and Rectangle to be shapes—not any
random class someone else writes.


How Do You Declare a Sealed Class?

Add the sealed keyword to your class.
List the allowed subclasses with the permits keyword.

Example:

public sealed class Shape permits Circle, Square, Rectangle { }

Only Circle, Square, and Rectangle can extend Shape.


What About the Subclasses?

Each subclass must say how it continues the sealing:
final — No one can extend it further.
sealed — It can be extended, but only by specific classes.
non-sealed — Anyone can extend it.

Example:

public final class Circle extends Shape { }        // Can't be extended
public sealed class Rectangle extends Shape permits FilledRectangle { }
public non-sealed class Square extends Shape { }   // Can be extended by anyone


Where Do the Subclasses Have to Be?

They must be in the same package or same module as the sealed class.


Sealed Interfaces

Works the same way as sealed classes, but for interfaces.
You can control which classes or interfaces can implement or extend your interface.


Using Records

You can use Java’s record classes as permitted subclasses.
Records are always final (can’t be extended).


Why Does This Matter for Type Safety?

The compiler can check your code more strictly.
For example, it can prevent you from casting between types that can never be related,
making your code safer.


New API Methods:

isSealed() — Tells you if a class/interface is sealed.
permittedSubclasses() — Lists the classes that are allowed to extend/implement a sealed
class/interface.

In summary:
Sealed classes and interfaces let you tightly control your class hierarchies, making
your code safer and easier to understand. You decide exactly which classes can extend
or implement your base types, and Java enforces these rules for you.


Disadvantage of Sealed Classes:

You can't use it as a library for any project , as you can't add backward compatibility
as what is predefined in the permits of sealed nly that will be allowed , and even if
you added that later in the permit you would have to add for all the rest of the class
extending that the permit statements .